A high risk game of great stature
Copa Libertadores - River Plate vs Boca Juniors Opinion

Enter Luis Rubiales, Florentino Perez and some politicians who couldn't say no - Madrid have brought in a game of great prestige: the Copa Libertadores final between River Plate and Boca Juniors.

Nobody has explained what exactly the benefits are to Madrid of hosting such a high-risk game as River-Boca on Sunday 9 December.

There have been suggestions, such as the economic boost for the city and the image that can be projected to the world of Madrid and Spain, while the disadvantages have not been offered as a counterbalance.

It is vital that for for Spain and Madrid to offer a strong image, the nation's security forces need to display an exhibition of their efficiency and good work.

The focus of the game should only be on the outcome of the result; not the anarchic scenes that were visible to the world just a couple of weeks ago.

It is important to put across a good image and to show that the city and its security forces will be unwilling to accept any violence.

Rubiales, Perez and politicians have banded together to show to the world that Spain is a modern, functioning and open country; the perception of the nation can be altered on the effectiveness of its security forces on a high-risk matchday.

Many believe that the game should not be played after the scenes outside El Monumental, River's stadium, while it has also been argued that this is South America's competition and that it should be played in their continent as this is their equivalent of the Champions League.

In Europe or Spain, the race for promotion from the Segunda Division is deemed to be more interesting than the final of the Copa Libertadores.

There is residual attention from the fans of Real Madrid who want to see who makes their way to their home ground, and little more than that.

The rest are caught up in the chaos of ticket distribution, the resale market, how many Argentines are in Spain, and so on.

Someone should have said no to CONMEBOL.

'Look friends, in Spain we have our league to deal with and our police aren't there to look after two suspects under suspicion,' should have been the message to River and Boca.

However, things are going to plan for those who were in favour as prices have tripled for flights, hotel and food in Madrid.