All of the wars that Luka Modric has won

The first balls he had weren't golden. They weren't even branded and were hardly up to standard. But those first footballs were worth a lot more to a little Luka Modric than the current ones. They were a refuge away from the bombs, an escape as a grandparent was killed by the Serbians. They provided a much better game than the videogames that started to become popular in the 1990s. They allowed him to dream, even if he may not have dreamt big enough.

Now he is the owner of a Ballon d'Or. The 33-year-old Croatian of just 172 centimetres has finished above the best two players in history, Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi. He went to the heart of France and took a French award in the year when the French national team won the World Cup.

Modric used to play football in the car park of the hotel that served as home for refuges in Zadar. Those balls were rough. It was there that he started to fantasise about his true idol, Zvonimir Boban. "My role model as a player and person was Zvonimir Boban," he said. That's why there are photos in which Modric appears with the AC Milan tracksuit.

Modric has won many wars in his life, some away from the Balkans and always with a ball. When he went to try out for Hajduk Split behind the back of Tomislav Basic, who punished him by not letting him play for several weeks. When Basic made him hang from bars in order to grow. When he had to go out on loan two years in a row once he did sign for the club, going to Zrinjski Mosta in Bosnia and Inter Zapresic in Croatia. When he made a name for himself in Tottenham. When he forced a move to Real Madrid. When he won multiple European Cups, as well as a league title. When he did something amazing with Croatia by becoming a World Cup runner-up.

His latest battle would also be the fulfilment of a wish. It's to retire at Real Madrid. Both the club and the player will have to do their part so that the end of the story can be like it was for Zinedine Zidane, who went out wearing white and with the Estadio Santiago Bernabeu on their feet. The Ballon d'Or now belongs to this No.10.

