ATK cashes in on CFC’s largesse


The hosts allow two soft goals while suffering a 3-2 reverse
Chennaiyin FC hasn’t been able to find a breakthrough this season, more so at home. The defending champion came up with yet another poor performance, with two soft hand-balls inside the box in each half, and allowed ATK to script a 3-2 win here on Sunday.

Once again, the home team started well before squandering its chances. Though Chennaiyin had the clear edge in possession, it was frustratingly sloppy and poor finishing added to its woes.

As early as the seventh minute, Italian Andrea Orlandi missed a sitter from close range. The move was set up beautifully by Issac Vanmalsawma who released Raphael Augusto on the left flank. The latter sent a superb low shot to Orlandi but the Italian shot wide.

On a platter
Chennaiyin gave away possession without the opposition even working for it and the visitors capitalised on the ‘offer’ to go ahead in the 14th minute. Jayesh Rane came up with a sizzling 30-yarder to the top-left corner to give ATK the lead.

Exactly 10 minutes later, Chennaiyin equalised when Issac recovered a corner and kept the ball in play before passing it to skipper Maison Alves who sent a perfect pass for Thoi Singh. The latter made no mistake, sending the sparse but vociferous crowd into raptures.

Despite a low possession percentage, ATK kept the home team on its toes and created chances through Manuel Lanzarote’s brilliance.

Lanzarote strikes
Towards the end of the first half, the visitors struck when Hitesh Sharma’s shot to the near post was handled by Eli Sabia. Lanzarote converted from the spot to give ATK the lead again.

Both teams looked staid in the second half until the 78th minute when a melee while clearing an ATK corner saw Carlos Salom make two clearances on the goalline before handling the ball. The referee immediately pointed to the spot. Lanzarote, who was prolific scorer for FC Goa with 12 strikes last season, slotted home calmly to make it 3-1.

In the 88th minute, Issac Vanmalsawma netted for Chennaiyin, some consolation for the creative midfielder who produced a fine performance. However, that wasn’t enough to avoid a fourth defeat at home from five matches.

The result: Chennaiyin FC 2 (Thoi Singh 24, Isaac Vanmalsawma 88) lost to ATK 3 (Jayesh Rane 14, Manuel Lanzarote 44-pen, 80-pen).

