Football, fakes and Modric's Ballon d'Or

There are fakes all over the world. It's incredible. They began to appear last December, in the Club World Cup. Luka Modric was chosen as the best player of the tournament, ahead of Cristiano Ronaldo. In Abu Dhabi, people started to see those who manipulated everything and only see the white horizon. Curious.

The World Cup arrived and the colour of his shirt changed, although weeks earlier he had become a Champions League winner for the fourth time, the third in a row. In Russia, some highlighted Ivan Rakitic, others Paul Pogba, N'Golo Kante, Kylian Mbappe or even Antoine Griezmann, but the majority recognised Luka Modric's work, guiding the Croatian national team to the final in Russia. He didn't score prolifically but the world was in awe of the midfielder. He was chosen the best player at the World Cup, lighting up the tournament in his chequered shirt, by a FIFA jury.

The summer went by and UEFA, ignorantly, gave him the player as their best player. Including the World Cup, but the critics were silenced. Votes arrived from all over, fans, journalists, players. Everyone votes but the legend grows and some still claim that it's manipulated.

Then FIFA and The Best ceremony took place in London. The whole world of football votes. Without exception. Nobody escaped and Modric led the way. Curious. The critics continued to refuse to recognise him as the best player of the season. Some because of their scarves, others because of their blindness and some for the witchcraft, to call it that, that Real Madrid has on what happens in football and beyond.

We keep going. The end of the year nears and the Institute for Football Statistics revealed him to be the best player in the last 11 months, preluding what happened in Paris, which is none other than the Ballon d'Or. That, given by the writers of the French magazine, once again declares Modric the best in 2018 without any discussion. Curious as much as coincidental.

It's strange what is happening. Maybe for the power of Real Madrid or the ignorance of those who live in football, whether with boots on, tracksuits or in front of a computer. Something is wrong. If everyone is against solidarity in football, making the team play, who raises the level of his team-mate's football, they are ignorant. When Lionel Messi or Cristiano Ronaldo won, they complained because football is a team sport. Today, that argument shouldn't count.

It doesn't matter to recognise that Modric was the best player in 2018, although it hurts a lot. Of course he doesn't have the strength of Ronaldo, the ability of Messi or the genius touches of Griezmann, but any player, coach or fan would love to have Modric in his team. The ignorant ones.

What is true is that Modric completed a cycle of awards in Paris. There is no debate and the reason is clearly that he has been chosen by all of the possible stakeholders, but some will never be convinced.

