Gokulam snatches a draw

Bagan finds the home side a tough nut to crack
Founded in 1889, Mohun Bagan is India’s oldest surviving football club. Gokulam Kerala FC was formed only last year, but it proved a tough nut to crack yet again for the illustrious Kolkatan team as home side came from behind to force a 1-1 draw in the opening I-League match for both sides at the Corporation Stadium here on Saturday.

Last season Gokulam had first stunned Bagan away before drawing at home. The score, incidentally, was also 1-1 in that game played here last March.

It was Henry Kisekka who had netted the equaliser for Gokulam then. Seven months later, the talented Ugandan striker scored the opening goal of the match — but, for Bagan.

With the Kolkatans completely dominating the first half, in which they enjoyed more than 75 percent of possession, it looked like Kisekka’s departure would prove particularly costly for the Kerala club.

His goal came with five minutes remaining for half-time, as he headed in a 25-yard free-kick by Arijit Bagui.

The free-kick was won by Bugui himself, for a needless tackle on him by K. Deepak, who also collected a yellow card. That was only one of the several chances that came the visiting side’s way in the first half.

After giving Bagan a scare in the opening minute, with a swift run down the left flank by its new signing Antonio German, Gokulam seemed content to play in its own half.

The Kolkatans could have been pardoned if they felt almost confident of taking three points from their opening fixture.

But, Gokulam, which showed so much resilience in its maiden season, came roaring back after the break. With the fast improving Arjun Jayaraj and S. Rajesh, who replaced Gani Ahmed Nigam, putting the Bagan defence under pressure, the equaliser didn’t seem far away.

It came in the 71st minute off a splendid counterattack authored by Arjun, who showed commendable composure and control inside the box.

His header could not be cleared properly by the defence or the goalkeeper Sankar Roy. And, heartbreakingly for Bagan, its defender Lalchhawnkima deflected the ball back into his own net, much to the delight of the 20,000-odd crowd.

The result: Gokulam Kerala FC 1 (Lalchhawnkima 71-og) drew with Mohu Bagan 1 (Henry Kisekka 40).

