Indian Super League: Many chances, no goals


Chennaiyin FC and Kerala Blasters’ miserable run continues
Chennaiyin FC and Kerala Blasters played out a goalless draw in their Indian Super League match at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium here on Thursday.

Seimenlen Doungel hit the post for Kerala as its winless run continued and Thoi Singh missed a sitter as defending champion Chennaiyin failed to make the best use of its chances to revive a disastrous season.

Surprise at the start
The game threw up surprises even before the kick-off. Blasters captain Sandesh Jhingan and Seiminlen Doungel — one of Kerala’s best performers this season — started from the bench. John Gregory made five changes, leaving out the likes of goalkeeper Karanjit Singh, Carlos Salom and Anirudh Thapa from Chennaiyin’s starting line-up.

Neither team looked comfortable in the first few minutes. The first real chance of the match came in the 30th minute from a set piece. Mailson Alves headed an Orlandi free-kick onto the path of Thoi Singh whose powerful volley went straight at Blasters’ goalkeeper Dheeraj Singh, who was later adjudged the man of the match.

Just three minutes later, in a quick counter-attack, Jeje, who’s been going through a dry spell in front of goal, squared the ball to Thoi. The latter scuffed the shot to miss the easiest chance of the game.

Augusto delights
Raphael Augusto, pulling the strings in midfield and entertaining fans with his intricate skills, was the only bright spark of the game. He created more than one good chance early in the second half, but it just didn’t look like Chennaiyin's day.

Goalkeeper Sanjibhan Ghosh kept Chennaiyin in the game when he got down well to save a shot from Sahal Abdul Samad in the 51st minute after a brilliant run from Kizito.

Samad made an important contribution at the other end a few moments later when he dived to block a shot from Orlandi that was on its way in.

In the 71st minute, Orlandi missed an easy chance to put the home side in front when he skied a shot

It was another frustrating night for Blasters. Its best chance of the match came in the 80th minute when Doungel’s shot came off the upright.

The visitors created a few more chances in the final ten minutes and David James even brought Jhingan on, but to no avail.

The result: Chennaiyin FC 0 drew with Kerala Blasters 0.