Liverpool rides on Origi’s fortuitous strike

Facile win puts Barcelona on top of the table
A freak injury-time goal from Liverpool substitute Divock Origi settled the Merseyside derby and kept Jurgen Klopp’s unbeaten team hard on the heels of Premier League pacesetters Manchester City on Sunday.

The 1-0 victory extended Liverpool’s unbeaten sequence in Merseyside derbies in the Premier League to 16 games although the manner of the winning goal made this one of the more unforgettable games.

Messing it up
In the 96th minute, Virgil van Dijk mishit a hopeful, desperate shot in the direction of the Everton goal with the effort ballooning into the air and the defender turning his back in disgust. But Everton goalkeeper Jordan Pickford struggled to judge the ball as it dropped from the Anfield night sky.

With the ball looking as if it might hit the cross-bar, the England man pushed the ball upwards and presented Origi with a simple headed finish into an open net.

In the La Liga, Ousmane Dembele took another step on the road to redemption as Barcelona eased past Villarreal to move back to the top of table.

Dembele, dropped last month by coach Ernesto Valverde, was making his second consecutive start and repaid the faith by teeing up Gerard Pique’s opening goal in a comfortable 2-0 win at the Camp Nou.

First goal
Carles Alena, the 20-year-old Spaniard also regarded as a star of the future, came off the bench to add a late flourish, chipping in his first Liga goal and Barca’s second after a defence-splitting pass from Lionel Messi. “Alena has earned his step up to the first team,” Valverde said.

The win puts Barca back at the top, in front of Sevilla and Atletico Madrid, who were each held to 1-1 draws earlier on Sunday, away to Alaves and Girona respectively.

In Serie A, Roma battled back for a 2-2 draw which denied Inter Milan second place in a Stadio Olimpico thriller between two sides looking to impress after losing in Europe during the week.

The results:

Premier League: Liverpool 1 (Origi 90+6) bt Everton 0.

La Liga: Girona 1 (Stuani 45+2) drew with Atletico Madrid 1 (Ramalho-OG 82); Barcelona 2 (Pique 36, Alena 87) bt Villarreal 0; Alaves 1 (Jony 37) drew with Sevilla 1 (Ben Yedder 78).

Serie A: Chievo 1 (Pellissier 25) drew with Lazio 1 (Immobile 66); Roma 2 (Under 51, Kolarov 74-pen) drew with Inter Milan 2 (Balde 37, Icardi 66). Bundesliga: Eintracht Frankfurt 1 (Jovic 87) lost to VfL Wolfsburg 2 (Mehmedi 31, Ginczek 68).