Modric wins the Ballon d'Or ahead of Cristiano Ronaldo and Griezmann

Modric ready to take home the Ballon d'Or

The winner of the Ballon d'Or 2018 is Real Madrid and Croatia midfielder Luka Modric, adding to his awards as FIFA's The Best and the World Cup's Golden Ball.

The 33-year-old has entered the history books, ending 10 years of duopoly dominance by Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi.

In Paris, Modric collected the trophy alongside his former team-mate Ronaldo, in second place, and Atletico Madrid's Antoine Griezmann, who came third.

Modric was accompanied by his wife and three children, as well as Florentino Perez in the front row, and could not hide his happiness.


Few people in football have a bad word to say about Modric and he has won all three major individual awards in 2018, proving that he is deserving of the trophy.

FIFA's jury voted for him at the World Cup as he won the Golden Ball, then captains, coaches, journalists and players voted for him at The Best, then more journalists gave him their vote for France Football.

Traditionally, the World Cup has been decisive in the awarding of the trophy and this year the winners were the same country as the host of the awards, leading many to expect that it may be a Frenchman to win the award.

However, Modric won the race easily, despite not being a goalscorer and doing his work to create opportunities for others in his team, being a regular man who is not covered in tattoos and spends his free time filming for adverts.

The journey has been a metaphor for his life, overcoming numerous obstacles, from running away from Serbian soldiers as a child to a loan to Bosnia to establish himself as a footballer.

Daniel Levy then made it difficult for him to leave Tottenham for Real Madrid and he struggled at first but is now a fan favourite.

Having won three Champions League titles in as many years, and four in total, he has been crucial in many of those victories in Lisbon, Milan, Cardiff and Kiev.

In addition, he was a key element as Croatia finished runners-up in this summer's World Cup.

