Real Madrid overwhelm the world of football

On Monday night, Luka Modric was awarded with the 2018 Ballon d'Or. It was his first, but this is not a new thing for Real Madrid. In the last six years, the European champions have won five of these trophies, especially thanks to a player who may be the best in their history, Cristiano Ronaldo. They are overwhelming the world of football.

Moreover, Los Blancos have won four Champions League trophies in the last five years. If we look at this fact with perspective, those numbers are tremendous, as just five clubs in history (AC Milan, Bayern Munich, Liverpool, Barcelona and Ajax) have ever won four or more European Cups or Champions League trophies. We are saying that Real have done this in just five years. They are overwhelming the world of football.

In the best decade in the history of Barcelona, with maybe the best player the Catalan club will ever have in Lionel Messi, Real Madrid have left them in the background, dominating international football and linking three consecutive Champions League trophies with three Ballon d'Or awards. Even a person like Carles Puyol was worried about this and criticised the club management. They are overwhelming the world of football.

On the other hand, the best Atletico Madrid in history have come up against a wall called Real Madrid, who knocked out Los Rojiblancos four consecutive times in the primary European competition, including in two historic and unforgettable Champions League finals that Real won. They are overwhelming the world of football.

Real Madrid have 13 European Cups. It is just a number, yes, but again if we look it with perspective then it may mean much more. After Spanish teams (who boast a total of 18 trophies), the clubs who have the most are the Italians and the English, with 12 triumphs each. This means that Los Blancos have more cups than the strongest foreign leagues in history. They are overwhelming the world of football.

In conclusion, despite other teams winning some matches, their mini crisis, the sale of world superstars, the loss of coaches and the River vs Boca issue (which will be played at the Estadio Santiago Bernabeu), Real Madrid are still on everyone's lips.

Because Real Madrid are overwhelming the world of football.

