San Martín de Tucumán, the Argentine home of former MLS players


There has been a lot of talk about the influx of South American footballers, notably Argentines, to Major League Soccer (MLS) in recent years. But what happens when they leave MLS? Where do they end up playing?

Perhaps we have the answer: It seems that all roads lead to San Martín de Tucumán in Argentine football.

Oddly enough, the newly promoted side has four former MLS players in their ranks: Claudio Bieler (Sporting Kansas City), Fabián Espíndola (Real Salt Lake, New York Red Bulls, DC United), Álvaro Fernández (Seattle Sounders) and Adrián Arregui (Montreal Impact).

"We constantly talk about MLS," said Arregui to MARCA, adding, "we watch the games, we talk about them. It was a wonderful experience. We miss it because of the comfort, maybe not so much for the football, but for the tranquil life that one has there." The Uruguayan Fernández had two spells in MLS with the Seattle Sounders and formed part of the team that was league champion of the 2016 season.

"I feel very fortunate to have played in MLS with the Sounders. We were champions against Toronto FC, we won a couple U.S. Open Cups, the truth is that I have the best memories of that experience," said El Flaco.

Espíndola was in MLS much longer, 10 years in all, starting in 2007 when there were only a few Argentines in the league.

"I spent most of my career there. Mi children were born there. I'm absolutely proud of my time in MLS. I was a champion with Real Salt Lake in 2009, which was the biggest joy I've had in my career," commented Espíndola.

When asked if now Espíndola and the three others speak to each other in English on the pitch to confuse opponents, the striker could only chuckle in response. "Hah! No! But we remember certain things about what it was like playing in MLS and to have that experience," said Espíndola.

Arregui was in MLS just a half-season in 2017 before returning to Argentine football for personal reasons. Nevertheless, the midfielder highlights his time living in the Canadians city and remains an Impact fan to this day.

"I liked the experience for its orderliness, the quality of life and the well-being of the players. I'm still in contact with the boys there, Nacho [Piatti], Victor [Cabrera]. I watch Montreal's games. The truth is that when one goes to MLS, he returns with another experience. Now the ones that go, stay longer," elaborated Arregui.

In the various chats with these players, the topic of order is mentioned a lot. Taking into account the violence that is seen in Argentine football at the moment, the opportunity to play in a much more tranquil atmosphere is very attractive to Argentine and Uruguayan footballers.

"Teammates ask me all the time about MLS, of how things are in that league. They're curious. The truth is that MLS is very orderly, it has everything and for a Uruguayan or South American footballer it is a really nice option," stressed Fernández.

And while fully focused on the Argentine football season, the four are still paying attention to the MLS playoffs, where Gerardo 'Tata' Martino's Atlanta United chockful of South American players is looking to reach the final.

"Hopefully Atlanta as much for Tata and the Argentines that are on that team as much for the football that is plays," said Arregui.

Currently, San Martín de Tucumán find itself in a difficult position in the SuperLiga table, 19 th of 26 teams and last in the Primera División relegation battle.

Despite this challenge, there is confidence within this MLS-flavored Argentine team that they can get the points to reach safety.

"It's a newly promoted team and adapting to the Primera División has been tough, but it never gives up in matches and we're going to fight for results until the end," concluded Fernández.