Talking tactics: The Clasico edition

Messi's injury has thrown beleaguered Madrid coach Lopetegui a lifeline, but Valverde's Barcelona has shown it can cope without its talisman
The biggest tactical wrinkle of Sunday’s El Clasico involves Lionel Messi’s absence.

Julen Lopetegui, who has had a difficult start to life in Madrid, will be thankful: the Argentinian genius tends to give opposition coaches severe headaches, dictating the way they set their teams up.

Ernesto Valverde, on the other hand, will have the unenviable task of replacing Messi. Having overseen an evolution from last season’s winger-less, asymmetric 4-4-2 to a flexible 4-3-3/4-2-3-1 hybrid system, Valverde will need to rethink matters again.

Barcelona, last season, was a pragmatic side. It sacrificed offensive width for central control, congesting the midfield. Its favoured method of attacking was to overload the mid-right, with Messi, Ivan Rakitic and Paulinho moving cleverly — all this to free up space for left-back Jordi Alba to make runs and supply cut-backs and crosses.

Valverde recast Barcelona in 2018, hoping to address the weaknesses of last season and preserve the strengths.

So Ousmane Dembele was introduced as the left-sided winger, adding attacking width. Messi, ‘second striker’ last season, played on the right of the front three, with the freedom to drift centrally.

This 4-3-3 could seamlessly switch to a 4-2-3-1 mid-match, with Dembele shifting to the right wing, Coutinho stepping forward from the midfield three, leaving behind a Sergio Busquets-Rakitic pivot, and Messi taking over the No. 10 space.

While these changes opened up attacking options, Valverde persevered with last season’s compact 4-4-2 block without the ball, Dembele falling back into the midfield line. The pressing system to regain the ball doesn’t appear to have changed either.

So what does Valverde do to compensate for Messi’s absence?

Talking tactics: The Clasico edition  
He could eschew the winger but stay with the 4-3-3 like he did in midweek Champions League action against Inter Milan. Rafinha started on the right of the front three, but often dropped deeper: this helped bolster the midfield of Rakitic, Busquets and the impressive Arthur, but also made his runs more difficult to track.

Should Valverde stick with Rafinha, he can always bring on Dembele, or indeed Malcolm, to give Madrid's tired defenders a different challenge.

While Lopetegui will be preparing for what Valverde may do, he will know that he needs to get his house in order first. In theory, his principles are sound.

The two defining features of his philosophy are central overloads and width in possession — the aim is to constantly move the opposition defence from side to side to provoke a moment of disorganisation.

Lopetegui’s Madrid, in a 4-3-3, does this in a few ways. Wingers Gareth Bale and Marco Asensio stay wide, stretching the defence horizontally. When they pinch in to overload the central areas, the full-backs provide the attacking width.

Karim Benzema drops off as well, adding to the centre and vacating the No. 9 space for out-to-in diagonal runs from the wide-men and full-backs.

In midfield, Casemiro protects space, recycles possessions and makes tactical fouls to disrupt the opposition. Toni Kroos splits left, staying deeper than he is accustomed to, to control the tempo. The third midfielder, Luka Modric or Isco, acts as both a link-man to connect the attack together and a ball-carrier.

Lopetegui has also used Isco instead of Asensio in the front three when he wants greater security in possession.

While all of this sounds good, Madrid just hasn’t clicked into top gear. The side continues to produce a high shot volume — it has managed 18.2 shots per game, compared to Barca’s 17.9 — but it hasn’t fashioned enough clear-cut chances.

Time is running out for Lopetegui. Messi’s injury has given him a lifeline; will his side help him capitalise on it?

Numbers game
Here is how the the rivals stack up against each other:

HEAD-TO-HEAD
Last six matches: Barcelona 3 | Real Madrid 2 | Draws 1

Overall: Barcelona 92 | Real Madrid 95 | Draws 50

La Liga: Barcelona 70 | Real Madrid 72 | Draws 34

At Camp Nou: Barcelona 61 | Real Madrid 27 | Draws 25

La Liga at Camp Nou: Barcelona 49 | Real Madrid 20 | Draws 19

With Messi involved: Barcelona 17 | Real Madrid 12 | Draws 9

With Ronaldo involved: Barcelona 14 | Real Madrid 8 | Draws 8

MANAGERS’ TRACK RECORD
Ernesto Valverde

Overall Matches: 587 | Won 296 | Lost 169 | Drawn 122 | Win rate 50.43%

At Barcelona: Matches 72 | Won 50 | Lost 6 | Drawn 16 | Win rate 69.44%

Julen Lopetegui

Overall: Matches 111 | Won 73 | Lost 14 | Drawn 24 | Win rate 65.76%

At Real: Matches 13 | Won 6 | Lost 5 | Drawn 2 | Win rate 46.15%