The anger of Cristiano Ronaldo's friends and family: This world lives on corruption

Ballon d'Or voting breakdown: Who did each country's journalist pick?

The best memes from the Ballon d'Or gala

Cristiano Ronaldo's two-year stint at the top of the Ballon d'Or podium ended on Monday, as the five-time winner finished second in the 2018 vote much to the dismay of his friends and family.

His former Real Madrid teammate Luka Modric took the prize and some of those close to Ronaldo didn't bite their tongue when discussing the fact that the Portuguese superstar finished in second place.

"Unfortunately, this is a world that lives on corruption, the mafia and f**king money," his sister Elma Aveiro wrote on social media.

"God's power is greater than all of this rotting.

"God may take his time, but he doesn't fail."


His close friend Miguel Paixao also expressed his dismay.

"It's absolutely incredible what they've done this year," Paixao wrote.

"This is a great lack of respect towards the person who has really done the most to once again be considered the best.

"Many will say I am only saying this because he is a friend, but no.

"It's more than that, I am a fair person and don't forget facts.

"There are facts that speak for themselves.

"The truth is that nobody scored more in the 2017/18 season than Ronaldo, with 54 official goals.

"He was the top scorer in the Champions League for the sixth year in a row with 15 goals.

"He won the Champions League, the Club World Cup, the UEFA Super Cup and the Supercopa de Espana, while scoring decisive goals.

"He was the man of the most notable and memorable moment of the World Cup, the hat-trick against Spain.

"He became the first player in the world to score in the final stages of nine consecutive major international tournaments.

"He became the first player in the world to move past the 400 goals mark in the top five European leagues.

"He scored the best goal of the year and probably the best goal in the history of the Champions League in Turin, when still with Real Madrid.

"Out of all the Ballon d'Or candidates, nobody is having such a good start to the season, with goals, assists and great performances.

"There are no arguments against these facts.

"One other thing is true, that they'll have to put up with the best ever for a long time yet.

"The story continues."

He also posted a series of hashtags, expressing his pride at Ronaldo's achievements.