UEFA approves third club competition

The executive committee of UEFA have approved a third club competition for European clubs which will run between 2021 to 2024 at least.

It is currently being named Europa League 2.

"An inclusive competition means more games for more clubs and more federations," said Aleksander Ceferin, UEFA president.

However, it is not yet clear how teams will qualify for the competition.

It will be similar in format to the current Champions League and Europa League with 32 teams in a group format.

There will be eight groups of four, followed by a last sixteen, quarter-final, semi-final and final.

In addition, before the last sixteen there will be a play-off round between teams finishing second in each group and teams to have finished third in their Europa League groups.

In total, there will be 141 games played over 15 weeks, with the winner earning a spot in the Europa League for the following campaign.

Games will be played on Thursday alongside Europa League fixtures, with the Champions League continuing as usual on Tuesday and Wednesday.

There will also be a third time slot created for fixtures, kicking off at 16:30.

The finals of the three UEFA competitions will all be played in the same week, with the new competition finding a winner on Wednesday, before the Europa League on Thursday and Champions League on Saturday.

At least 34 teams will be represented in the group stages of UEFA competitions thanks to the creation of this tournament, an increase from the current total of 26.

All federations will have access to all three tournaments and will see their quotas for teams remain the same.

"UEFA's new club competitions makes UEFA's club competitions more inclusive than ever," Ceferin explained.

"There will be more games for more clubs, with more represented federations in the group stage.

"This competition arose from continual conversations with the Association of European Clubs.

"There was a big demand from clubs to increase the possibility of participating more regularly in European competitions.

"This has achieved a strategic focus and will lead to higher quality and inclusion in our competitions."

The new arrival will have no impact on the Champions League.