The Latest Photos From The Funeral Of President George H.W. Bush

The Trumps, Obamas and Clintons joined friends and family to pay respects at Washington National Cathedral.

The flag-draped casket of former President George H.W. Bush is carried by a military honor guard into a State Funeral at the National Cathedral.
Ceremonies are underway to honor former President George H.W. Bush, the 41st U.S. president, who died Friday at the age of 94.

Bush’s casket was flown from Houston to Washington, D.C., early Monday, and his body will lie in state until Wednesday. 

A memorial service for friends and family members will be held Wednesday at Washington National Cathedral. The commemorations conclude Thursday, when the casket will be flown back to Houston for a service at St. Martin’s Episcopal Church and buried at Bush’s presidential library in College Station. He will be laid to rest next to his wife, Barbara Bush, who died in April.

Former President George W. Bush touches the casket of his father, former President George H.W. Bush, at the State Funeral at the Washington National Cathedral.

Former US President George W. Bush speaks at the State Funeral for his father, former US President George H.W. Bush.

Former President George W. Bush, right, cries after speaking during the state funeral for his father.

The casket is viewed for the funeral service for former President George H.W. Bush at the National Cathedral.


The casket departs the U.S. Capitol.


Sully, Bush's yellow Labrador service dog , sits near the casket of the former president as he lies in state at the U.S. Capitol.


Former Sen. Bob Dole salutes before the flag-draped coffin.


Jenna Bush Hager and her sister Barbara Bush stand with their husbands Henry Chase Hager, left, and Craig Coyne, second right, as they pay respect in front of the casket.

A military honor guard and mourners surround the casket. 

The Trumps pay their respects in the U.S. Capitol Rotunda.


Members of the public, including nuns, pay their respects. 


People pay their respects.

Members of the public file through the Capitol Rotunda to view the casket.

Bush's flag-draped casket lies in state inside the Capitol Rotunda.

The casket bearing his remains is carried into the Capitol Rotunda.

A military honor guard carries Bush's casket into the Capitol.

Former President George W. Bush, Laura Bush and other family members watch as a military honor guard carries George H.W. Bush's casket into the Capitol.

The casket bearing Bush's remains arrives at the Capitol.

A military honor guard with Bush's casket inside the Capitol.

Supreme Court Justices Stephen Breyer, Neil Gorsuch, Elena Kagan, Brett Kavanaugh, Clarence Thomas, John Roberts and Samuel Alito await the arrival of Bush's casket inside the Capitol Rotunda.

A military honor guard in Houston takes the former president's remains to Special Air Mission 41 to be flown to Washington. 

George W. Bush and Laura Bush head up the stairs to the plane after the casket was placed on board at Ellington Field in Houston.

Sully the service dog. 

People watch the departure ceremony in Houston.

