Bush hailed at funeral as U.S. 'soldier-statesman,' master of civility

WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The late President George H.W. Bush was hailed at his state funeral on Wednesday as a World War Two hero, Cold War veteran and architect of a U.S. victory against Iraq who went on to represent a bygone era of civility in American politics.

Amid an unusual bipartisan spirit at the service at the Washington National Cathedral, both Republican and Democratic politicians honoured a president who called for a “kinder, gentler” nation.

Bush, the 41st U.S. president, died last week in Texas aged 94. He occupied the White House from 1989 to 1993, and navigated the collapse of the Soviet Union and expelled former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein’s forces from oil-rich Kuwait.

“George H.W. Bush was America’s last great soldier-statesman,” Jon Meacham, a presidential biographer, said in a eulogy. “He stood in the breach in the Cold War against totalitarianism. He stood in the breach in Washington against unthinking partisanship,” he said.

The capital’s current political feuds were briefly set aside in honour of the late president, a naval aviator who survived being shot down by Japanese forces over the Pacific Ocean in World War Two, and former head of the CIA.

President Donald Trump shook hands with his predecessor, former President Barack Obama, who he has often sharply criticized, as he took his seat at the cathedral.

Democratic former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Trump’s 2016 election opponent, and her husband Bill Clinton shared the front pew with Obama, Trump and their spouses.

Trump, like Bush a Republican, infuriated the late president by attacking his sons, former President George W. Bush and Jeb Bush, one of Trump’s rivals in the 2016 Republican primary campaign.

Members of the military honor guard stand at the flag-draped casket of former U.S. President George H.W. Bush as it lies in state inside the U.S. Capitol Rotunda in Washington, U.S., December 4, 2018. REUTERS/Yuri Gripas
George W. Bush said his father “valued character over pedigree, and he was no cynic. He’d look for the good in each person, and he usually found it.”

“The best father a son or daughter could ever have,” the former president said in his eulogy, his voice cracking with emotion.

The late president has been remembered as a patrician figure who represented an earlier era of civility in American politics.

He was voted out of office in part for failing to connect with ordinary Americans during an economic recession. But his reputation for moderation and politeness has shone more brightly in recent years in light of the divisiveness and anger in the United States that accompanied the rise of Trump.

Canadian former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney lauded Bush’s role in handling the end of the Cold War and helping the tricky reunification of Germany.

“When George Bush was president of the United States of America, every single head of government in the world knew that they were dealing with a gentleman, a genuine leader, one who was distinguished, resolute and brave,”

Bush put together a U.S.-led international coalition that ousted invading Iraqi forces from Kuwait in 1991