The nation honors President George H.W. Bush

US flags to be flown at half-staff for longest stretch of time since President Ford's death

Photo by Alex Edelman / AFP

US "Flag Code" dictates that the flag be flown at half-staff for 30 days following the death of a president or former president, meaning with President George H.W. Bush's passing, it will remain lowered for the longest period of time since President Gerald Ford died in December 2006:

    The flag shall be flown at half-staff 30 days from the death of the president or a former president; 10 days from the day of death of the vice president, the chief justice or a retired chief justice of the United States, or the speaker of the House of Representatives; from the day of death until interment of an associate justice of the Supreme Court, a secretary of an executive or military department, a former vice president, or the governor of a state, territory, or possession; and on the day of death and the following day for a member of Congress.

55 min ago
Former first lady Laura Bush visits the White House

From CNN's Kate Bennett

First lady Melania Trump hosted a tour for about 20 members of the Bush family, a White House official told CNN on background.

However, she also “wanted to allow for the Bush family to have time at the White House together,” so she did not stay the entire length the visit, which lasted about an hour. Trump provided holiday cookies for the family and arranged for them to be able to see the staff from the residence.

Former first lady Laura Bush later posted on her Instagram her "thanks" to Trump. Several Bush family members took the special tour, including her sister-in-law Doro Bush and several of Bush Sr.'s grandchildren.

She also posted a picture posing with White House staff members whom she called her "old friends.

3 hr 26 min ago
Former Sen. Bob Dole salutes Bush's casket

 

In an emotional scene, former Sen. Bob Dole was helped out of his wheelchair and saluted George H.W. Bush's casket in the Capitol Rotunda moments ago.

Dole told CNN on Saturday that Bush's passing marked the end of an era. (Bush was the last World War II veteran president.)

    "I believe there are certain qualities that veterans have and when Bush was president, I think about three-fourths of Congress were veterans and we would stick together and work together across the aisle. And President Bush was a bipartisan president. So we got quite a lot done," Dole said.

Watch the moment:

4 hr 50 min ago
Prince Charles will attend Bush's funeral

George H.W. Bush (l.) with the Prince of Wales Charles (r.) attend a ceremony at the American Air Museum of Great Britain in 2002.

Britain's Prince Charles will attend George H.W. Bush's funeral in Washington, DC tomorrow, his official residence announced.

He'll be representing his mother, Queen Elizabeth.

5 hr 44 min ago
Sully the service dog visits Bush's casket in the US Capitol

Sully, a Labrador service dog who worked with George H.W. Bush, just visited the former president's casket in the US Capitol Rotunda.

Sully traveled to Washington, DC, from Texas with Bush's casket and the Bush family.

The yellow lab went to work with Bush this summer after former first lady Barbara Bush passed away earlier this year. Sully can perform a two-page list of commands, including answering the phone and fetching items.

So what happens to Sully now? A highly trained service dog, Sully will now go back into service to help other veterans and is going to Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, former President George W. Bush wrote in an Instagram post.

"As much as our family is going to miss this dog, we're comforted to know he'll bring the same joy to his new home, Walter Reed, that he brought to 41," Bush wrote.

Watch the moment Sully arrived:

5 hr 14 min ago
Colin Powell pays his respects to George H.W. Bush

Colin Powell, who served as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during George H.W. Bush's presidency, just paid his respects to the former president. Bush is lying in state at the US Capitol, and Powell saluted in front of the casket.

After Bush's death, Powell remembered how the leader believed that politics doesn't ever need to be "nasty."

"I wish we could get some of that back in our system now," Powell said, adding, "he was a great president, and he was a perfect American."

Powell also served as secretary of state under Bush's son, former President George W. Bush.